Updates to Desktop Linux Hardening Guide (#81)
PrivSec-dev/privsec.dev: content/posts/linux/Desktop-Linux-Hardening.md

Note that these configurations do not disable unprivileged user namespaces. There are also a few things in `/etc/modprobe.d/30_security-misc.conf` to keep in mind:
- The `bluetooth` and `btusb` kernel modules are disabled by default. You need to comment out `install bluetooth /bin/disabled-bluetooth-by-security-misc` and `install btusb /bin/disabled-bluetooth-by-security-misc` if you want to use Bluetooth.
- Apple filesystems are disabled by default. This is generally fine on non-Apple systems; however, if you are using Linux on an Apple product, you **must** check what filesystem your EFI partition uses. For example, if your EFI filesystem is HFS+, you need to comment out `install hfsplus /bin/disabled-filesys-by-security-misc`, otherwise your computer will not be able to boot into Linux.

> - The `cdrom` and `sr_mod` modules are only blacklisted by default. If you have no intention to ever use CD-ROM devices they should be disabled. To implement this, at the bottom of the configuration file 'uncomment' both install (disable) commands and 'comment out' both existing blacklist commands.

Author: Technically right now no, but who knows what the kernel might do in the future if for some reason blacklist commands are pushed up the hierarchy. I will leave it you guys to decide.

> - The `cdrom` and `sr_mod` modules are only blacklisted by default. If you have no intention to ever use CD-ROM devices they should be disabled. To implement this, at the bottom of the configuration file 'uncomment' both install (disable) commands and 'comment out' both existing blacklist commands.

Reviewer: Fair point. My proposal to ignore the `blacklist` commands is in the interest of readability in an already very long post. If you can reword in a more digestible manner, then the part about commenting the `blacklist` commands can stand. Otherwise my recommendation is to leave out that part. (After all, accuracy at the time of writing is the only realistic expectation anyway.)

> - The `cdrom` and `sr_mod` modules are only blacklisted by default. If you have no intention to ever use CD-ROM devices they should be disabled. To implement this, at the bottom of the configuration file 'uncomment' both install (disable) commands and 'comment out' both existing blacklist commands.

Reviewer 2: I think let's not add this rn if its not the case

- Kernel
```
slab_nomerge init_on_alloc=1 init_on_free=1 pti=on vsyscall=none page_alloc.shuffle=1 randomize_kstack_offset=on extra_latent_entropy debugfs=off oops=panic quiet loglevel=0
```

Kicksecure does not enforce either `module.sig_enforce=1` or ` lockdown=confidentiality` by default as they lead a lot of hardware compatibility issues, consider enabling these if possible on your system. Additionally, `mce=0` is also no [no longer](https://forums.whonix.org/t/kernel-hardening/7296/493) used.

- Entropy generation
```
random.trust_cpu=off random.trust_bootloader=off
```

> As sources of initial entropy at boot, both the CPU and bootloader should be [distrusted](https://lkml.org/lkml/2022/6/5/271). For CPUs, the RBRAND instructions set is [impossible to audit](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand), and moving forward as a precaution, the bootloader should be treated identically. Note that both of these kernel parameters will increase boot time.

Author: I think there is a misunderstanding regarding what `distrust` actually does. It does not discard the entropy generated by these sources, in fact it pools it as per usual and then utilises it in an indistinguishable manner. 

With `distrust`, the system is forced to obtain more entropy at boot due simply because it does not not credit the CPU/bootloader entropy into the total amount required. I have yet to come across any evidence that proves having less entropy is superior to obtaining more for hardening purposes.

The singular downside to this approach is an increased boot time as more entropy must be sourced. This can be particularly slow on VMs.

Regarding `rng_core.default_quality=1000`, the only effect the will have is decreasing boot times as the entropy generated by these sources will be credited to the required amount. But credited does not mean included, [it was always included](https://systemd.io/RANDOM_SEEDS/).

Finally, when it comes to risk mitigation, systems with “known flawed RNG implementation” are by definition known. What of systems that have unknown flaws? At the cost of lengthier boot you can be better shielded against faulty RNG implementation.

See also the discussion when [I introduced distrusting the bootloader](https://forums.whonix.org/t/kernel-hardening/7296/465) in Kicksecure/Whonix ~5 months ago.

> As sources of initial entropy at boot, both the CPU and bootloader should be [distrusted](https://lkml.org/lkml/2022/6/5/271). For CPUs, the RBRAND instructions set is [impossible to audit](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand), and moving forward as a precaution, the bootloader should be treated identically. Note that both of these kernel parameters will increase boot time.

Reviewer: In your original text, you wrote "both the CPU and bootloader should be distrusted" implying the plain English definition of the term. If you mean something different (which in hindsight I can see), you should make it clear — perhaps italicize the term and clarify the definition in parentheses or elsewhere in context.

Regarding the actual recommendations. Perhaps I am misunderstanding, so please explain what exactly happens with `random.trust_cpu=off random.trust_bootloader=off`.
- Is entropy sourced from other sources where it otherwise wouldn't be?
- Are other sources providing significantly more entropy than they would normally be?
  - If so, what makes those sources any more trustworthy than the CPU and EFI if they now have a greater contribution to the entropy pool?
- What specifically are those other sources, if any? The set of all hardware RNGs on the system?

Basically, unless these kernel parameters are actually _adding more sources to the mix_ rather than merely changing the weights of existing sources, I am still not convinced these settings are useful (though I am much more receptive to discrediting the EFI knowing how badly many of them are programmed).

> As sources of initial entropy at boot, both the CPU and bootloader should be [distrusted](https://lkml.org/lkml/2022/6/5/271). For CPUs, the RBRAND instructions set is [impossible to audit](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand), and moving forward as a precaution, the bootloader should be treated identically. Note that both of these kernel parameters will increase boot time.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can just word it as "Set distrust to increase entropy"?

> ```
> random.trust_cpu=off random.trust_bootloader=off
> ```
> 
> As sources of initial entropy at boot, both the CPU and bootloader should be [distrusted](https://lkml.org/lkml/2022/6/5/271). For CPUs, the RBRAND instructions set is [impossible to audit](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand), and moving forward as a precaution, the bootloader should be treated identically. Note that both of these kernel parameters will increase boot time.

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```
random.trust_cpu=off random.trust_bootloader=off
```

Some implementations of the RDRAND instruction (by which the CPU offers a random number generator to the OS) have proven to be [vulnerable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RDRAND#Security_issues) or [outright defective](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2019/10/how-a-months-old-amd-microcode-bug-destroyed-my-weekend/). RDRAND is also impossible to audit, being part of the CPU itself.

As a precaution for the integrity of cryptographic operations, the CPU and bootloader should not be used as _credited_ entropy sources. Note that this change will increase boot time.

Further reading:

- [systemd: Random Seeds](https://systemd.io/RANDOM_SEEDS/)
- [Madaidan: RDRAND](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand)
- [Linux kernel mailing list](https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/20220605171539.417872-1-Jason@zx2c4.com/T/)
- [Hacker News discussion](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=33223232)
- [NixOS discussion](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/165355) (also cites many additional sources)
````

> As sources of initial entropy at boot, both the CPU and bootloader should be [distrusted](https://lkml.org/lkml/2022/6/5/271). For CPUs, the RBRAND instructions set is [impossible to audit](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand), and moving forward as a precaution, the bootloader should be treated identically. Note that both of these kernel parameters will increase boot time.

Reviewer 3: For future reference, this discussion was partially split to https://github.com/PrivSec-dev/privsec.dev/pull/81#issuecomment-1367535519 and https://github.com/PrivSec-dev/privsec.dev/pull/81#issuecomment-1374423909.

> ```
> random.trust_cpu=off random.trust_bootloader=off
> ```
> 
> As sources of initial entropy at boot, both the CPU and bootloader should be [distrusted](https://lkml.org/lkml/2022/6/5/271). For CPUs, the RBRAND instructions set is [impossible to audit](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand), and moving forward as a precaution, the bootloader should be treated identically. Note that both of these kernel parameters will increase boot time.

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```
random.trust_cpu=off random.trust_bootloader=off
```

Some implementations of the RDRAND instruction (by which the CPU offers a random number generator to the OS) have proven to be [vulnerable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RDRAND#Security_issues) or [outright defective](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2019/10/how-a-months-old-amd-microcode-bug-destroyed-my-weekend/). RDRAND is also impossible to audit, being part of the CPU itself.

As a precaution for the integrity of cryptographic operations, the CPU and bootloader should not be used as _credited_ entropy sources. Note that this change will increase boot time.

Further reading:

- [systemd: Random Seeds](https://systemd.io/RANDOM_SEEDS/)
- [Madaidan: RDRAND](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand)
- [Linux kernel mailing list](https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/20220605171539.417872-1-Jason@zx2c4.com/T/)
- [Hacker News discussion](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=33223232)
- [NixOS discussion](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/165355) (also cites many additional sources)
````

@raja-grewal I added additional background information here. I believe extensive background information is particularly important here to avoid reactions like my own initial reaction. Please let me know your thoughts and commit/edit these changes as you see fit.

Madaidan recommends that you disable [unprivileged user namespaces](https://www.containerlabs.kubedaily.com/LXC/Linux%20Containers/User_namespaces.html) due to the [significant attack surface for privilege escalation](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/linux.html#kernel). However, some software such as Podman and LXC relies on unprivileged user namespaces. If you wish to use such software, do not disable `kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone`.

If you are using Kicksecure or Whonix, most of this hardening is included by default. If you are using Debian, you should consider [morphing it into Kicksecure](https://www.kicksecure.com/wiki/Debian). On other distributions you can copy the [configuration files from Kicksecure](https://github.com/Kicksecure/security-misc/tree/master/etc/sysctl.d) into `/etc/sysctl.d/` (but note that these configurations do not disable unprivileged user namespaces). There are also a few things in `30_security-misc.conf` to keep in mind:

> - The `bluetooth` and `btusb` kernel modules are disabled. You need to comment out `install bluetooth /bin/disabled-bluetooth-by-security-misc` and `install btusb /bin/disabled-bluetooth-by-security-misc` to use Bluetooth.
> - Apple filesystems are disabled. This is generally fine on non-Apple systems; however, if you are using an Apple device, you **must** check what filesystem your EFI partition uses. For example, if your EFI filesystem is HFS+, you need to comment out `install hfsplus /bin/disabled-filesys-by-security-misc`, otherwise your computer will not be able to boot Linux.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Bluetooth is disabled. Comment out the `install bluetooth` and `install btusb` lines to use Bluetooth.
- Thunderbolt is disabled. Comment out the `install thunderbolt` line to use Thunderbolt devices.
- Apple filesystems are disabled. While generally fine on non&#8209;Apple systems, if you are using an Apple device you **must** check the filesystem of your EFI partition and comment out the relevant `install` line, otherwise your Linux install will not boot. For example, comment out the `install hfsplus` line if your ESP filesystem is HFS+.
```

##### Kernel

```
slab_nomerge init_on_alloc=1 init_on_free=1 pti=on vsyscall=none page_alloc.shuffle=1 randomize_kstack_offset=on extra_latent_entropy debugfs=off oops=panic quiet loglevel=0
```

Kicksecure does not enforce either `module.sig_enforce=1` or `lockdown=confidentiality` by default as they lead to a lot of hardware compatibility issues; consider enabling these if possible on your system. Additionally, [`mce=0` is no longer recommended](https://forums.whonix.org/t/kernel-hardening/7296/493).

##### Entropy generation

```
random.trust_cpu=off random.trust_bootloader=off
```

As sources of initial entropy at boot, both the CPU and bootloader should be [distrusted](https://lkml.org/lkml/2022/6/5/271). For CPUs, the RBRAND instructions set is [impossible to audit](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#rdrand), and moving forward as a precaution, the bootloader should be treated identically. Note that both of these kernel parameters will increase boot time.

##### DMA mitigations

```
intel_iommu=on amd_iommu=on efi=disable_early_pci_dma iommu.passthrough=0 iommu.strict=1
```

> Direct memory access (DMA) attacks can be mitigated via IOMMU and the [aforementioned kernel module disabling](#kernel-hardening). ([See also Madaidan's commentary.](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#dma-attacks)) Furthermore, [strict enforcement of IOMMU TLB invalidation](https://github.com/Kicksecure/security-misc/blob/master/etc/default/grub.d/40_enable_iommu.cfg) should be applied so devices will never be able to access stale data contents.
> 
> _Note that disabling the busmaster bit on all PCI bridges (`disable_early_pci_dma`) during very early boot can cause complete boot failure on certain systems if they do not have adequate resources. Therefore, as always, ensure you have a fallback option to boot into the system whenever modifying any kernel parameters._

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Direct memory access (DMA) attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DMA_attack) can be mitigated via IOMMU and [disabling certain kernel modules](#kernel-modules). Furthermore, [strict enforcement of IOMMU TLB invalidation](https://github.com/Kicksecure/security-misc/blob/master/etc/default/grub.d/40_enable_iommu.cfg) should be applied so devices will never be able to access stale data contents.

[These parameters **do not provide comprehensive DMA protection**.](https://github.com/PrivSec-dev/privsec.dev/pull/81#issuecomment-1367511126) In early boot (before the kernel has loaded), only the system firmware can enforce IOMMU and thus provide DMA protection. A DMA attack in early boot can patch the kernel in memory to completely undermine these parameters.

_Note that disabling the busmaster bit on all PCI bridges during very early boot (`efi=disable_early_pci_dma`) can cause complete boot failure on certain systems with inadequate resources. Therefore, as always, ensure you have a fallback option to boot into the system whenever modifying any kernel parameters._

Further reading:

- [IOMMU Groups, inside and out](https://vfio.blogspot.com/2014/08/iommu-groups-inside-and-out.html)
- [IOMMU introduction](https://terenceli.github.io/%E6%8A%80%E6%9C%AF/2019/08/04/iommu-introduction)
- [intel IOMMU driver analysis](https://terenceli.github.io/%E6%8A%80%E6%9C%AF/2019/08/10/iommu-driver-analysis)
- [Avoiding gaps in IOMMU protection at boot](https://mjg59.dreamwidth.org/54433.html)
- [Madaidan: DMA attacks](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#dma-attacks)
```

> Direct memory access (DMA) attacks can be mitigated via IOMMU and the [aforementioned kernel module disabling](#kernel-hardening). ([See also Madaidan's commentary.](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#dma-attacks)) Furthermore, [strict enforcement of IOMMU TLB invalidation](https://github.com/Kicksecure/security-misc/blob/master/etc/default/grub.d/40_enable_iommu.cfg) should be applied so devices will never be able to access stale data contents.
> 
> _Note that disabling the busmaster bit on all PCI bridges (`disable_early_pci_dma`) during very early boot can cause complete boot failure on certain systems if they do not have adequate resources. Therefore, as always, ensure you have a fallback option to boot into the system whenever modifying any kernel parameters._

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Direct memory access (DMA) attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DMA_attack) can be mitigated via IOMMU and [disabling certain kernel modules](#kernel-modules). Furthermore, [strict enforcement of IOMMU TLB invalidation](https://github.com/Kicksecure/security-misc/blob/master/etc/default/grub.d/40_enable_iommu.cfg) should be applied so devices will never be able to access stale data contents.

[These parameters **do not provide comprehensive DMA protection**.](https://github.com/PrivSec-dev/privsec.dev/pull/81#issuecomment-1367511126) In early boot (before the kernel has loaded), only the system firmware can enforce IOMMU and thus provide DMA protection. A DMA attack in early boot can patch the kernel in memory to completely undermine these parameters.

_Note that disabling the busmaster bit on all PCI bridges during very early boot (`efi=disable_early_pci_dma`) can cause complete boot failure on certain systems with inadequate resources. Therefore, as always, ensure you have a fallback option to boot into the system whenever modifying any kernel parameters._

Further reading:

- [IOMMU Groups, inside and out](https://vfio.blogspot.com/2014/08/iommu-groups-inside-and-out.html)
- [IOMMU introduction](https://terenceli.github.io/%E6%8A%80%E6%9C%AF/2019/08/04/iommu-introduction)
- [intel IOMMU driver analysis](https://terenceli.github.io/%E6%8A%80%E6%9C%AF/2019/08/10/iommu-driver-analysis)
- [Avoiding gaps in IOMMU protection at boot](https://mjg59.dreamwidth.org/54433.html)
- [Madaidan: DMA attacks](https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html#dma-attacks)
```

For Fedora Workstation, you can follow [H&aring;vard Moen's guide](https://haavard.name/2022/06/22/full-uefi-secure-boot-on-fedora-using-signed-initrd-and-systemd-boot/) which covers sbctl installation, unified kernel image generation with [dracut](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dracut), and automatic signing with systemd&#8209;boot.

On Arch, the process is very similar, though sbctl is already included in the official repositories and you will need to switch from [mkinitpcio](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Mkinitcpio) to dracut. Arch with linux&#8209;hardened works well with `sbctl`, but some level of tedious pacman hooks are required for appropriately timing the re&#8209;signing of all relevant files every time the kernel or bootloader is updated.

> In my opinion, this is the most straightforward setup, with a lot of potential such as [systemd's future UKI plans including support for remote attestation](https://0pointer.de/blog/brave-new-trusted-boot-world.html) similar to [GrapheneOS Auditor](/posts/android/android-tips/#setup-auditor). With that being said, it does not appear to work well with specialized setups such as Fedora Silverblue/Kinoite or Ubuntu with [ZSys](https://github.com/ubuntu/zsys). More testing is needed to see if they can be made to work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In my opinion, this is the most straightforward setup, with a lot of potential such as [systemd's future UKI plans including support for early&#8209;boot attestation](https://0pointer.de/blog/brave-new-trusted-boot-world.html). With that being said, it does not appear to work well with specialized setups such as Fedora Silverblue/Kinoite or Ubuntu with [ZSys](https://github.com/ubuntu/zsys). More testing is needed to see if they can be made to work.
```
